README.md, before:

# _De novo_ peptide sequencing with InstaNovo

[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/instanovo.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/instanovo)
<a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/instadeepai/InstaNovo/blob/main/notebooks/getting_started_with_instanovo.ipynb">
<img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/> </a>

The official code repository for InstaNovo. This repo contains the code for training and inference
of InstaNovo and InstaNovo+. InstaNovo is a transformer neural network with the ability to translate
fragment ion peaks into the sequence of amino acids that make up the studied peptide(s). InstaNovo+,
inspired by human intuition, is a multinomial diffusion model that further improves performance by
iterative refinement of predicted sequences.

![Graphical Abstract](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/instadeepai/InstaNovo/main/graphical_abstract.jpeg)

**Links:**

- bioRxiv: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.08.30.555055v3

**Developed by:**

- [InstaDeep](https://www.instadeep.com/)
- [The Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine](https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/organisations/department-of-biotechnology-and-biomedicine) -
  [Technical University of Denmark](https://www.dtu.dk/)

## Usage

### Installation

To use InstaNovo, we need to install the module via `pip`:

```bash
pip install instanovo
```

It is recommended to install InstaNovo in a fresh environment, such as Conda or PyEnv. For example,
if you have
[conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/)/[miniconda](https://docs.conda.io/projects/miniconda/en/latest/)
installed:

```bash
conda update -n base conda
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate instanovo
```

Note: InstaNovo is built for Python >= 3.10

### Training

To train auto-regressive InstaNovo using Hydra configs (see `--hydra-help` for more information):

```bash
usage: python -m instanovo.transformer.train [--config-name CONFIG_NAME]

Config options:
  config-name       Name of Hydra config in `/configs/instanovo/`
                    Defaults to `instanovo_acpt`
```

Note: data is expected to be saved as Polars `.ipc` format. See section on data conversion.

To update the InstaNovo model config, modify the config file under
[configs/instanovo/base.yaml](https://github.com/instadeepai/InstaNovo/blob/main/configs/instanovo/base.yaml)

### Prediction

To evaluate InstaNovo:

```bash
Usage: python -m instanovo.transformer.predict [OPTIONS] DATA_PATH MODEL_PATH

  Predict with the model.

Options:
  -o, --output-path TEXT      Save predictions to a csv file (required in de novo mode)
  -n, --denovo                Evaluate in de novo mode, will not try to compute metrics
  -s, --subset FLOAT          Portion of set to evaluate, sampled randomly
  -k, --knapsack-path TEXT    Path to pre-computed knapsack, saved to path if not found
  -w, --n-workers INTEGER     Number of dataloader workers
```

### Using your own datasets

To use your own datasets, you simply need to tabulate your data in either
[Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) or [Polars](https://www.pola.rs/) with the following schema:

The dataset is tabular, where each row corresponds to a labelled MS2 spectra.

- `sequence (string) [Optional]` \
   The target peptide sequence excluding post-translational modifications
- `modified_sequence (string)` \
  The target peptide sequence including post-translational modifications
- `precursor_mz (float64)` \
  The mass-to-charge of the precursor (from MS1)
- `charge (int64)` \
  The charge of the precursor (from MS1)
- `mz_array (list[float64])` \
  The mass-to-charge values of the MS2 spectrum
- `mz_array (list[float32])` \
  The intensity values of the MS2 spectrum

For example, the DataFrame for the
[nine species benchmark](https://huggingface.co/datasets/InstaDeepAI/ms_ninespecies_benchmark)
dataset (introduced in [Tran _et al._ 2017](https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.1705691114))
looks as follows:

|     | sequence             | modified_sequence          | precursor_mz | precursor_charge | mz_array                             | intensity_array                     |
| --: | :------------------- | :------------------------- | -----------: | ---------------: | :----------------------------------- | :---------------------------------- |
|   0 | GRVEGMEAR            | GRVEGMEAR                  |      335.502 |                3 | [102.05527 104.052956 113.07079 ...] | [ 767.38837 2324.8787 598.8512 ...] |
|   1 | IGEYK                | IGEYK                      |      305.165 |                2 | [107.07023 110.071236 111.11693 ...] | [ 1055.4957 2251.3171 35508.96 ...] |
|   2 | GVSREEIQR            | GVSREEIQR                  |      358.528 |                3 | [103.039444 109.59844 112.08704 ...] | [801.19995 460.65268 808.3431 ...]  |
|   3 | SSYHADEQVNEASK       | SSYHADEQVNEASK             |      522.234 |                3 | [101.07095 102.0552 110.07163 ...]   | [ 989.45154 2332.653 1170.6191 ...] |
|   4 | DTFNTSSTSNSTSSSSSNSK | DTFNTSSTSN(+.98)STSSSSSNSK |      676.282 |                3 | [119.82458 120.08073 120.2038 ...]   | [ 487.86942 4806.1377 516.8846 ...] |

For _de novo_ prediction, the `modified_sequence` column is not required.

We also provide a conversion script for converting to Polars IPC binary (`.ipc`):

```bash
usage: python -m instanovo.utils.convert_to_ipc source target [-h] [--source_type {mgf,mzml,csv}] [--max_charge MAX_CHARGE] [--verbose]

positional arguments:
  source                source file or folder
  target                target ipc file to be saved

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --source_type {mgf,mzml,csv}
                        type of input data
  --max_charge MAX_CHARGE
                        maximum charge to filter out
```

_Note: we currently only support `mzml`, `mgf` and `csv` conversions._

If you want to use InstaNovo for evaluating metrics, you will need to manually set the
`modified_sequence` column after conversion.

## Roadmap

This code repo is currently under construction.

**ToDo:**

- Add data preprocessing pipeline
- Multi-GPU support

## License

Code is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (see [LICENSE](LICENSE.md))

The model checkpoints are licensed under Creative Commons Non-Commercial
([CC BY-NC-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/))

## BibTeX entry and citation info

```bibtex
@article{eloff_kalogeropoulos_2024_instanovo,
	title = {De novo peptide sequencing with InstaNovo: Accurate, database-free peptide identification for large scale proteomics experiments},
	author = {Kevin Eloff and Konstantinos Kalogeropoulos and Oliver Morell and Amandla Mabona and Jakob Berg Jespersen and Wesley Williams and Sam van Beljouw and Marcin Skwark and Andreas Hougaard Laustsen and Stan J. J. Brouns and Anne Ljungars and Erwin Marten Schoof and Jeroen Van Goey and Ulrich auf dem Keller and Karim Beguir and Nicolas Lopez Carranza and Timothy Patrick Jenkins},
	year = {2024},
	doi = {10.1101/2023.08.30.555055},
	publisher = {Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory},
	URL = {https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.08.30.555055v3},
	journal = {bioRxiv}
}
```

Commit message:

ci: Test on Windows and Linux in GitHub Actions

README.md, after:

# _De novo_ peptide sequencing with InstaNovo

[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/instanovo.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/instanovo)
<a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/instadeepai/InstaNovo/blob/main/notebooks/getting_started_with_instanovo.ipynb">
<img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/> </a>
<a target="_blank" href="https://kaggle.com/kernels/welcome?src=https://github.com/instadeepai/InstaNovo/blob/main/notebooks/getting_started_with_instanovo.ipynb">
<img src="https://kaggle.com/static/images/open-in-kaggle.svg" alt="Open In Kaggle"/> </a>

The official code repository for InstaNovo. This repo contains the code for training and inference
of InstaNovo and InstaNovo+. InstaNovo is a transformer neural network with the ability to translate
fragment ion peaks into the sequence of amino acids that make up the studied peptide(s). InstaNovo+,
inspired by human intuition, is a multinomial diffusion model that further improves performance by
iterative refinement of predicted sequences.

![Graphical Abstract](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/instadeepai/InstaNovo/main/docs/assets/graphical_abstract.jpeg)

**Links:**

- bioRxiv:
  [https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.08.30.555055v3](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.08.30.555055v3)
- documentation:
  [https://instadeepai.github.io/InstaNovo/](https://instadeepai.github.io/InstaNovo/)

**Developed by:**

- [InstaDeep](https://www.instadeep.com/)
- [The Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine](https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/organisations/department-of-biotechnology-and-biomedicine) -
  [Technical University of Denmark](https://www.dtu.dk/)

## Usage

### Installation

To use InstaNovo, we need to install the module via `pip`:

```bash
pip install instanovo
```

It is recommended to install InstaNovo in a fresh environment, such as Conda or PyEnv. For example,
if you have
[conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/)/[miniconda](https://docs.conda.io/projects/miniconda/en/latest/)
installed:

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate instanovo
```

Note: InstaNovo is built for Python >= 3.8, <3.12 and tested on Linux and Windows.

### Training

To train auto-regressive InstaNovo using Hydra configs (see `--hydra-help` for more information):

```bash
usage: python -m instanovo.transformer.train [--config-name CONFIG_NAME]

Config options:
  config-name       Name of Hydra config in `/configs/instanovo/`
                    Defaults to `instanovo_acpt`
```

Note: data is expected to be saved as Polars `.ipc` format. See section on data conversion.

To update the InstaNovo model config, modify the config file under
[configs/instanovo/base.yaml](https://github.com/instadeepai/InstaNovo/blob/main/configs/instanovo/base.yaml)

### Prediction

To evaluate InstaNovo:

```bash
Usage: python -m instanovo.transformer.predict [OPTIONS] DATA_PATH MODEL_PATH

  Predict with the model.

Options:
  -o, --output-path TEXT      Save predictions to a csv file (required in de novo mode)
  -n, --denovo                Evaluate in de novo mode, will not try to compute metrics
  -s, --subset FLOAT          Portion of set to evaluate, sampled randomly
  -k, --knapsack-path TEXT    Path to pre-computed knapsack, saved to path if not found
  -w, --n-workers INTEGER     Number of dataloader workers
```

### Using your own datasets

To use your own datasets, you simply need to tabulate your data in either
[Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) or [Polars](https://www.pola.rs/) with the following schema:

The dataset is tabular, where each row corresponds to a labelled MS2 spectra.

- `sequence (string) [Optional]` \
   The target peptide sequence excluding post-translational modifications
- `modified_sequence (string)` \
  The target peptide sequence including post-translational modifications
- `precursor_mz (float64)` \
  The mass-to-charge of the precursor (from MS1)
- `charge (int64)` \
  The charge of the precursor (from MS1)
- `mz_array (list[float64])` \
  The mass-to-charge values of the MS2 spectrum
- `mz_array (list[float32])` \
  The intensity values of the MS2 spectrum

For example, the DataFrame for the
[nine species benchmark](https://huggingface.co/datasets/InstaDeepAI/ms_ninespecies_benchmark)
dataset (introduced in [Tran _et al._ 2017](https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.1705691114))
looks as follows:

|     | sequence             | modified_sequence          | precursor_mz | precursor_charge | mz_array                             | intensity_array                     |
| --: | :------------------- | :------------------------- | -----------: | ---------------: | :----------------------------------- | :---------------------------------- |
|   0 | GRVEGMEAR            | GRVEGMEAR                  |      335.502 |                3 | [102.05527 104.052956 113.07079 ...] | [ 767.38837 2324.8787 598.8512 ...] |
|   1 | IGEYK                | IGEYK                      |      305.165 |                2 | [107.07023 110.071236 111.11693 ...] | [ 1055.4957 2251.3171 35508.96 ...] |
|   2 | GVSREEIQR            | GVSREEIQR                  |      358.528 |                3 | [103.039444 109.59844 112.08704 ...] | [801.19995 460.65268 808.3431 ...]  |
|   3 | SSYHADEQVNEASK       | SSYHADEQVNEASK             |      522.234 |                3 | [101.07095 102.0552 110.07163 ...]   | [ 989.45154 2332.653 1170.6191 ...] |
|   4 | DTFNTSSTSNSTSSSSSNSK | DTFNTSSTSN(+.98)STSSSSSNSK |      676.282 |                3 | [119.82458 120.08073 120.2038 ...]   | [ 487.86942 4806.1377 516.8846 ...] |

For _de novo_ prediction, the `modified_sequence` column is not required.

We also provide a conversion script for converting to Polars IPC binary (`.ipc`):

```bash
usage: python -m instanovo.utils.convert_to_ipc source target [-h] [--source_type {mgf,mzml,csv}] [--max_charge MAX_CHARGE] [--verbose]

positional arguments:
  source                source file or folder
  target                target ipc file to be saved

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --source_type {mgf,mzml,csv}
                        type of input data
  --max_charge MAX_CHARGE
                        maximum charge to filter out
```

_Note: we currently only support `mzml`, `mgf` and `csv` conversions._

If you want to use InstaNovo for evaluating metrics, you will need to manually set the
`modified_sequence` column after conversion.

## Roadmap

This code repo is currently under construction.

**ToDo:**

- Add data preprocessing pipeline
- Multi-GPU support

## License

Code is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (see [LICENSE](LICENSE.md))

The model checkpoints are licensed under Creative Commons Non-Commercial
([CC BY-NC-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/))

## BibTeX entry and citation info

```bibtex
@article{eloff_kalogeropoulos_2024_instanovo,
	title = {De novo peptide sequencing with InstaNovo: Accurate, database-free peptide identification for large scale proteomics experiments},
	author = {Kevin Eloff and Konstantinos Kalogeropoulos and Oliver Morell and Amandla Mabona and Jakob Berg Jespersen and Wesley Williams and Sam van Beljouw and Marcin Skwark and Andreas Hougaard Laustsen and Stan J. J. Brouns and Anne Ljungars and Erwin Marten Schoof and Jeroen Van Goey and Ulrich auf dem Keller and Karim Beguir and Nicolas Lopez Carranza and Timothy Patrick Jenkins},
	year = {2024},
	doi = {10.1101/2023.08.30.555055},
	publisher = {Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory},
	URL = {https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.08.30.555055v3},
	journal = {bioRxiv}
}
```
